## Custom Coastal Emergency Preparedness and Response Checklist

By Ariam Mogos and [Atul Varma][]

This prototype was created at the [Rockaway Beach Civic Hack Day][]
on June 1, 2013.

### Problem Statement

A lot of people knew Sandy was coming but didn’t know how to prepare,
and this is what usually happens a lot before disasters. Existing resources
such as the checklists by the American Red Cross, FEMA, OEM, and CDC 
contain many elements that are only applicable to certain demographics
and specific levels of urgency; this culminates in a flood of 
confusing information with a lot of noise in it.

For example, the CDC's checklist recommends taking a first aid class
or a CPR class. While this is useful for people who are preparing weeks
or months ahead of a disaster, it's useless to those who have just been
ordered to evacuate their homes. In the same vein, FEMA's advice to 
reinforce one's garage doors is useless to anyone who lives in an apartment.

### Solution

Many of the above issues can be resolved by asking the user a handful of
simple questions before presenting them with a checklist. Browser APIs
such as [navigator.geolocation][] can be used to automatically detect
where the user is, and provide important checklist items specific to
their locale. Social features can be added to the mix, which would allow
non-experts who have experienced disaster first-hand to add their own 
items and commentary.

Our prototype only goes so far as to implement the question-asking portion
of the proposed solution. It also only asks two questions.

We used the American Red Cross, FEMA, OEM, and CDC checklists as our raw 
materials and tagged most items to only be displayed if the user answered
questions in a certain way.

### Design Goals

As Atul Gawande's [Checklist Manifesto][] shows, a good checklist is
actually a carefully well-designed product. We wanted the checklist
generated by the app to follow the [Checklist for Checklists][] and
be something that was long enough to be useful, but not so long as
to overwhelm its user. In the spirit of this, we intentionally left out
items that seemed obvious.

### Features To Add

Aside from the things we didn't implement in the proposed solution,
here were some specifics that we wanted to get to during the hackathon
but didn't have time to implement:

* Use the browser's Geolocation API in concert with the FEMA elevation
  and flood zone data ([KMZ][]) to automatically detect whether the user
  is in a flood zone and offer contextual advice if so.

###

  [Atul Varma]: http://twitter.com/toolness
  [Rockaway Beach Civic Hack Day]: http://rockawayhelp.com/group-leaders-lay-out-their-ideas-for-change-at-hack-the-rock/
  [navigator.geolocation]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAPI/Using_geolocation
  [Checklist Manifesto]: http://gawande.com/the-checklist-manifesto
  [Checklist for Checklists]: http://www.projectcheck.org/checklist-for-checklists.html
  [KMZ]: https://hazards.fema.gov/femaportal/kmz/FEMA_NFHL_v2.4.kmz
